Docs (advanced): add detailed resource reservation page (#3283)
liqotech/liqo: docs/usage/resource-reservation.md

## Overview

A reservation in Liqo is the result of an exchange between two clusters:

* The **consumer** declares how much it would like to obtain by creating a `ResourceSlice` in its tenant namespace, with the requested quantities in `spec.resources`.
* The **provider** decides how much it actually grants by writing the accepted quantities back into `status.resources` of the same object (the slice is replicated across clusters by the *crd-replicator*).

Once the slice is `Accepted`, two derived resources materialize the reservation:

* On the **provider**, a `Quota` (`offloading.liqo.io/Quota`) is created in the tenant namespace, mirroring the accepted resources and the desired enforcement strictness.
* On the **consumer**, a `VirtualNode` is created with `spec.resourceQuota.hard` set to the same quantities, and the corresponding Kubernetes `Node` advertises that capacity to the local scheduler.

> By default, a single `ResourceSlice` is shared across all of the consumer's [offloaded namespaces](/usage/namespace-offloading.md): pods consume from the same `Quota` regardless of which offloaded namespace they live in. With multiple `VirtualNode`s (one per `ResourceSlice`), pods route to slices by the `VirtualNode` they are scheduled on, not by namespace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, a single `ResourceSlice` is shared across all of the consumer's [offloaded namespaces](/usage/namespace-offloading.md): pods consume from the same `Quota` regardless of which offloaded namespace they live in.
When multiple `VirtualNode`s are created (one per `ResourceSlice`), pods consume the quota based on the `VirtualNode` they are scheduled on, not by namespace.
```

* **Ensure offloaded pods comply with the enforcement mode.**
  When `defaultLimitsEnforcement` is `Soft` or `Hard`, the consumer's pods must declare `requests` (Soft) or matching `requests` and `limits` (Hard) before being offloaded (see [Resource quota enforcement](#resource-quota-enforcement) for the per-mode semantics).
  The `ShadowPod` admission webhook rejects non-compliant pods at the provider, leaving the local pod in `Pending` state; making pod specs compliant is the consumer application teams' responsibility, not Liqo's.

* **Provision the capacity advertised by the provider.**
  The provider must actually have the physical or cloud capacity to honor what `offloading.defaultNodeResources` and granted `ResourceSlice` objects promise.
  The default class controller does not verify against real capacity, so over-promising surfaces only at runtime with pods resulting in a `Pending` state; cluster sizing — whether manual, via `cluster-autoscaler` or Karpenter, or through cloud quota requests — is the provider operator's job.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```{code-block} bash
:caption: "Cluster consumer"
liqoctl peer \
  --kubeconfig=$CONSUMER_KUBECONFIG_PATH \
  --remote-kubeconfig=$PROVIDER_KUBECONFIG_PATH \
  --cpu=8 \
  --memory=16Gi \
  --pods=200 \
  --resource=nvidia.com/gpu=2
```

Any resource key supported by the Kubernetes `ResourceList` can be requested through the `--resource` command line parameter (repeatable), including extended resources advertised by the provider (e.g. `nvidia.com/gpu`).

### Peering without requesting resources

If the consumer needs to ask for resources other than CPU, memory, and pods (such as GPUs or other custom resources), it can create the peering connection without requesting any resources by providing the `--create-resource-slice=false` option:

```{code-block} bash
:caption: "Cluster consumer"
liqoctl peer \
  --kubeconfig=$CONSUMER_KUBECONFIG_PATH \
  --remote-kubeconfig=$PROVIDER_KUBECONFIG_PATH \
  --create-resource-slice=false
```

The command above creates a peering connection, but **the provider cluster is currently not sharing resources**.

> **To request resources** from a provider cluster, **a `ResourceSlice` must be created** specifying the amount of resources the consumer wants the provider to share, including any custom resources — see [After peering, with a separate `ResourceSlice`](#after-peering-with-a-separate-resourceslice) below.

Reviewer 2: I know this is in the original documentation but this is a good opportunity to remove it. This should be not valid anymore since now we have the `--resource` in liqoctl.

:caption: "Cluster consumer"
liqoctl create resourceslice gpu-pool \
  --remote-cluster-id cool-firefly \
  --cpu 4 --memory 8Gi --pods 30 \
  --resource nvidia.com/gpu=2
```
````

````{tab-item} YAML

```{code-block} yaml
:caption: "Cluster consumer"
apiVersion: authentication.liqo.io/v1beta1
kind: ResourceSlice
metadata:
  name: gpu-pool
  namespace: liqo-tenant-cool-firefly
  labels:
    liqo.io/remote-cluster-id: cool-firefly
    liqo.io/replication: "true"
spec:
  class: default
  providerClusterID: cool-firefly
  resources:
    cpu: "4"
    memory: 8Gi
    pods: "30"
    nvidia.com/gpu: "2"
```
````

`````

Each `ResourceSlice` is associated with one `Quota` on the provider, and with one or more `VirtualNodes` on the consumer (one by default); multiple slices toward the same provider originate multiple virtual nodes, which can be also useful to expose heterogeneous resources (for example, separate ARM and x86 pools — see the [multiple virtual nodes](/advanced/peering/offloading-in-depth.md#multiple-virtualnodes) section).

## Inspect the reservation

On the **consumer**, the resulting Liqo virtual `Node` exposes the granted capacity to the local scheduler as a regular node.

> `liqoctl info peer` shows the same information together with the rest of the peering status:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`liqoctl info peer` shows the info about the shared resource and of the peering status:
```

* `defaultLimitsEnforcement` (default `None`): controls how strictly the webhook interprets the `requests` and `limits` of each offloaded pod. It can take three values:

  * **`None`** (default): offloaded pods may have neither `requests` nor `limits` set, so the consumer might end up using more than the resources negotiated via the `ResourceSlice`.
  * **`Soft`**: offloaded pods must declare `requests`; pre-allocated resources stay within the quota, but if a pod uses more than its `requests` (because `limits` are higher or unset), actual usage can drift over.
  * **`Hard`**: offloaded pods must declare both `requests` and `limits`, with `limits == requests`. This is the strictest mode and the only one that turns the per-peering quota into a runtime guarantee, since the kubelet on the provider will throttle or kill containers that try to exceed their declared `limits`.

> The selected mode is propagated to every `Quota` created on the provider via the `Quota.spec.limitsEnforcement` field. Both options can be set at installation time or updated later via a Helm upgrade — for example, to set `defaultLimitsEnforcement` to `Hard`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The selected mode is propagated to every `Quota` created on the provider via the `Quota.spec.limitsEnforcement` field. Both options can be set at installation time or updated later. For example, to set `defaultLimitsEnforcement` to `Hard`:
```

* On the **provider**, a `Quota` (`offloading.liqo.io/Quota`) is created in the tenant namespace, mirroring the accepted resources and the desired enforcement strictness.
* On the **consumer**, a `VirtualNode` is created with `spec.resourceQuota.hard` set to the same quantities, and the corresponding Kubernetes `Node` advertises that capacity to the local scheduler.

The diagram below summarizes the flow and makes explicit on which cluster each object is created.

```{figure} /_static/images/advanced/resource-reservation/sequence.svg
:align: center
:alt: Sequence diagram of the ResourceSlice to Quota and VirtualNode flow across the consumer and provider clusters.
```

From that point on, the reservation has two enforcement points: the **consumer's Kubernetes scheduler**, which sees the `VirtualNode` as a node with finite capacity, and the **provider's `ShadowPod` admission webhook**, which rejects offloaded pods that would push the consumer past its `Quota`.
This double mechanism protects the *provider* cluster from malicious *consumers*, which may bypass the boundary checks implemented in the virtual Liqo node to consume, in the provider, more resources than what was negotiated.

> 

Reviewer 2: Here I'd add the warning we have here: https://github.com/liqotech/liqo/blob/master/docs/usage/peer.md?plain=1#L280

(ResourceReservationDefaultSlice)=

## Configure the default slice on the provider

When a consumer requests a slice without specifying particular amounts, the provider fills the missing fields with **its own installation-time defaults**.
These defaults are configured through the Helm value `offloading.defaultNodeResources`:

```{code-block} yaml
:caption: "values.yaml (provider)"
offloading:
  defaultNodeResources:
    cpu: "4"
    memory: "8Gi"
    pods: "110"
    ephemeral-storage: "20Gi"
```

The values shown above are the built-in defaults shipped by the Helm chart.
They can be tightened or extended at install time, or later via a Helm upgrade — either by setting the proper values in the Helm chart, or through the corresponding options on the `liqoctl install` / `helm upgrade` command line:

```{code-block} bash

> :caption: "Cluster provider"

Reviewer 2: Defaults are applied by the consumer cluster.
```suggestion
:caption: "Consumer cluster"
```

Author: @claudiolor I think there's a small misread here — `offloading.defaultNodeResources` is the provider's Helm value: the `RemoteResourceSliceReconciler` runs on the provider and reads it when filling in `status.resources` for incoming slices.
The doc text right above the bullet list already says "defined at installation time on the provider", so the `liqoctl install` command in this example needs to run on the provider cluster and the `:caption: "Cluster provider"` is intentional.
Happy to change if I'm missing something — let me know.

Reviewer 2: You're right, thanks for pointing it out! :)

The general mechanics of class controllers are also described in the [Custom Resource Allocation](/advanced/peering/offloading-in-depth.md#custom-resource-allocation) section of the offloading-in-depth page.

```{warning}
The class is chosen by the **consumer**, and the built-in default class controller is always running alongside any custom one — Liqo does not provide a built-in way to disable it.
A consumer can therefore bypass a strict custom controller simply by selecting `class: default` (or omitting the class), which routes the request to the lenient built-in controller.
To actually enforce a stricter policy at the provider, the custom controller must be paired with an external mechanism that prevents the lenient path from being used — for example, a Kubernetes admission webhook on the provider that rejects or rewrites the `spec.class` of incoming `ResourceSlice` objects, or a per-tenant Kubernetes `ResourceQuota` (see [Defense-in-depth: Kubernetes `ResourceQuota`](#defense-in-depth-kubernetes-resourcequota)) as a runtime cap independent of the slice negotiation.

> ```

Reviewer 2: I don’t think this is the right place to go into detail about this topic. Instead, we can briefly mention that, by default, the controller accepts all resources, but this behavior can be customized by defining a custom ResourceSlice class, and then link to the relevant section of the documentation: https://github.com/liqotech/resource-slice-class-controller-template .

Additionally, this could be a good opportunity to improve that part of the documentation. The current section about creating a custom ResourceSlice class is titled “Custom Resource Allocation,” which seems wrong. It might make sense to move this content to a dedicated section within the “Offloading in depth” page, or even create a separate page for it.

Author: @claudiolor Done — trimmed this section to a brief mention + link as you suggested.
On the broader point about restructuring the "Custom Resource Allocation" section in `offloading-in-depth.md `(including a possible rename or pulling it into its own page): good point, but I'd rather split that out into a follow-up PR after this one merges, since touching that file substantially would expand the diff and the review surface.
Happy to open it as a separate PR once this one is in.

A few aspects of the current design are worth keeping in mind when designing a reservation policy:

* The default `ResourceSlice` class controller does not perform a **cluster-wide capacity check**: it accepts every request and may therefore grant more resources than the provider physically has, leaving the final arbitration to the standard Kubernetes scheduler on the provider. Cross-peering reservation requires a custom class controller **paired with an admission webhook (or equivalent mechanism) that prevents consumers from selecting the lenient default class** — Liqo does not ship that mechanism.
* The `ShadowPod` admission webhook validates each consumer **against its own `Quota` only**; it does not check whether the sum of resources committed across all consumers exceeds the provider's real capacity.
* `defaultLimitsEnforcement` is a cluster-wide setting on the provider. Per-tenant strictness must be implemented with a custom class controller or via Kubernetes-level admission policies on the tenant namespaces.
* Reducing the granted resources on a slice does not evict pods that are already running; cordon and drain are the supported way to actively reclaim capacity.

> ## What Liqo does not

Reviewer 2: Not sure whether this is the right place for this section. Maybe we can extend the FAQs or we might have a dedicated page.

Author: Quick conflict between two reviewers I want to surface before proceeding:
@frisso asked earlier in this PR to move this section to the end of the page (after "Limitations"), which I did. @claudiolor is now suggesting the section is misplaced on this page entirely and should be moved to the FAQ or a dedicated page.
The section is currently in place at the end of the page. Could you two align on the direction? Three options:

1. Keep here at the end of the page (status quo per @frisso's earlier request).
2. Move to FAQ (relocating each bullet as a Q&A entry).
3. Move to a new dedicated page (e.g., docs/advanced/operational-prerequisites.md).

Happy to apply whichever once you've agreed.

  Liqo's handshake verifies *who* a peer is, not *whether they should be admitted*; there is no built-in approval workflow or admission queue at the organization level.

* **Choose the provider's reservation posture.**
  The provider operator must set the Helm chart values `offloading.defaultNodeResources` and `controllerManager.config.defaultLimitsEnforcement` before any consumer peers.
  Both can be updated later via a Helm upgrade: `defaultLimitsEnforcement` then propagates to existing `Quota` objects on the next reconciliation, while `defaultNodeResources` only affects future slice negotiations — slices already accepted retain the amounts they were granted.
  The chart ships defaults suited to demos (4 CPU, 8Gi, `None` enforcement); using them unchanged in production typically grants more than the operator intends and enforces nothing at runtime.

* **Agree on what each resource key physically represents.**
  Liqo treats resource keys (`cpu`, `memory`, `nvidia.com/gpu`, ...) as opaque strings; what `nvidia.com/gpu=2` actually means — A100s versus H100s, full cards versus MIG slices, with or without NVLink — must be agreed out of band.

>   Such a mismatch — for example, the consumer asking for `nvidia.com/gpu=2` expecting two H100 cards while the provider grants two A100 cards under the same key — is accepted at negotiation and only surfaces as wrong performance or runtime failure once workloads are scheduled.

Reviewer 2: I think declaring it just as a Liqo limitation is not fair. This is more a limitation of how resource allocation worked before DRA.
